	Sikkim Trekking - Sikkim unfold the wonder Treks
Sikkim shares a mountainous border with Nepal in the west, with China in the north and the east. All the early (pre-war) expeditions passed through Sikkim to cross over to Tibet on their way to attempt Everest. Francis Younghusband’s famous mission of 1904 to Tibet also passed through Sikkim. Doug Freshfield was one of the early mountaineers to visit this area. His book “Round Khangchendzonga” is a classic record of all the areas in North Sikkim. In West Sikkim, peaks like Kabru (7338m) were climbed in 1935 by C.R. Cook. Others like Kokthang and Rathong were climber much later. Even now some peaks have not been climbed from Sikkim side, though ascents have been made from Nepal. Northern Sikkim consists of Zemu glacier and valleys from which rises the third highest mountain of the world – Khangchendzonga. Pual Baur and his German team repeatedly attempted to climb it via its eastern approaches before the Second World War. Ultimately the Indian Army Team made subsequent repeat ascents. There are many peaks around Khanchendzonga like Simvo and Siniolchu, which are tempting and an open invitation to climbers.

Further North is Pyramid peak, the last 7000er climbed by the Himalayan Association of Japan (HAJ) in 1993. In the vicinity are peaks like Jongsanng and Chorten Nyima. Pauhunri with the pinnacle of Donkhya Ri is one of the chief attractions on the eastern side. There is a lot climbers can do in the Sikkim Himalayas.
Trekking Peaks

Mt. Thingchinkhang (5603Mts ) and Mt.Jopunu (6010m) are situated in western Sikkim and falls under Khangchendzonga National Park which is window to natural beauties, bio- diversity, sacred lakes and snow capped mountains. One can see this peak from Okhlathang Valley while trekking to Gochala (pass ). These two peaks have been declared by Sikkim Govt. as trekking peaks only recently. Since then it had caught the eyes of many mountaineers, but it has only been appreciated much then climbed. Yak and Yeti Travels has successfully climbed this peak in October 2000 and has been promoting successfully since then. Mt. Thingchinkhang and Mt. Jopuno can prove just more than a trekking peak for many mountain climbers. From the summit of these peaks one can enjoy a breath taking view of some of the most beautiful mountains of Sikkim Himalayas. Mt. Pandim (6691 mts) stands to the towering heights just in the same range where these trekking peaks rises. Just across Okhlathang Valley one can see peaks like Gocha, Rathong, Kabru sisters, Siniolchu and the mighty Khangchendzonga. Mt. Makalu in Nepal is also seen from here. The approach trek is one of the most beautiful trail in the Himalayas and takes you through Rhododendron bushes and alpine meadows. Yak and Yeti's base camp is ideally established in Okhlathang Valley or above on the ridge. To the adventure lovers these peaks provide an ultimate thrill combined with gentle trekking and will be an experience of a lifetime.

Itinerary
Day 01
Pick up from Biratnagar/ Bagdogra.Drive to Gangtok.Stay O/N.
Day 02
Day in Gangtok Meeting up the permit formalities preparation and visiting places of tourist interest.
Day 03
Drive to Yuksom from Gangtok.
Day 04
Trek Yuksum to Tshoka.
Day 05
Tshoka to Dzongri.
Day 06
Dzongri acclimatization day hike to Dzongrila pass.
Day 07
Trek to Thangsing from Dzongri.
Day 08
Trek onward to Okhlathang Valley to establish base camp
Day 09
Establish camp 1.
Day 10
Establish camp 2.
Day 11
additional day to re- establish camp 2. in case of bad weather or otherwise.
Day 12	Attempt for Summit or return to camp 1. if possible to the base camp.
Day 13	Option to trek to Gochala (takes two more days) or return to Tshoka, via Phedang meadow.
Day 14	Trek to Yuksom from Tshoka.
Day 15	Drive to Pemayangtse stay on , visit Tashiding monastry on the way.
Day 16	Visit Pemayangtse monastry in the morning and drive to Biratnagar/ Kalimpong/Darjeeling.
 
Cost
Basis Pax 4 - 8, 9 above Wilderness Trek US$ 975.00 US$ 845.00 in Sikkim

Standard
02 per person USD 695.00
03-08 per person USD 575.00
09-11 per person USD 499.00
12 above person USD 368.00

Deluxe
02 per person USD 765.00
03-08 per person USD 675.00
09-11 per person USD 585.00
12 above USD 515.00

Cost includes
1. Standard /3 star hotel in Kathmandu with bed & breakfast.
2. 10 nights 11 days Sikkim/Darjeeling package on the Twin sharing in the standard hotels all on full board basis,
3. all sightseeing with a good English speaking guide as per itinerary,
4. All transportation by car/van/coaches depending upon the size of the group.
5. Two way air fair Kathmandu to Kathmandu.
6. Necessary hotel/airport/ transfers.

Cost excludes
1. International airport taxes,
2. Sikkim/India visa fees,
3. All insurance,
4. All expenses of natural as drink laundry,
5. Trips etc

Travel Information :
Tour booking with full payment should reach us at least 15 days in a advance along with full passport details. There will be a cancellation charge of 50% for confirmed booking un to 7 days prior to departure for the journey. No refund thereafter even for NO_SHOWS & DELAYED ARRIVALS due to whatsoever regions

Visa Regulation:
One moth visa for Sikkim & Darjeeling can be obtained from any Indian Embassy or Consulate abroad. The Sikkim permit with Indian visa can also be obtained in Kathmandu, Nepal within one day with a condition that the client should be available in Kathmandu, Nepal visa can be obtained at the airport upon arrival.

Climate:
(Spring Feb/Mar/April 20 C - 25 C. Summer May/June/July 23C. - 29 C. Autumn Aug/Sep/October 16 C. -28 C. Winter Nov/Dec/January 07 C. - 14 C. (Above temperatures are based on day ones)

Clothing:
In general, heavy woollen wears are required in winter. However, a warm Jampur & a jacket are always advised due to the unpredictable nature of the weather. For the trek purpose, following items are recommended: Down jacket, Woollen Sweaters, Cotton/ Woollen Shirts, Woollen Trousers, Long johns, Rain cort, Comfortable trekking shoes, Sun Goggles, Sun hat, Warm Gloves, Suntanlotion, Water bottle, Chapstick, Medical Kit,

Risks & Liability:
Ramdung “Go” Treks & Expedition (P) Ltd. shall always put its all efforts in making your journey smooth and pleasant. However, as be responsible for any charge of cancellation of programmes due to any unavoidable circumstances such as road blockade, flood, snow, and unrest, cancellation of flight, delay arrivals, sickness or accidents. Any extra cost incurring there of shall be borne by the clients. So, it is most advisable that clients to have full insurance against medical and personal accidents. Cancellation insurance is also highly recommended.

Note:
Besides above itineraries, we also offer many other interesting programme for tour and treks. Exclusive programmes can be made available upon enquiry. Airfare is extra. One way airfare KTM/Biratnagar costs US$ 122.00 per person. If clients wish to travel by night coach, one way Coach Fare is US$ 650.00 per person.