At a height of 4,566 meters (14,980 ft), Mount Meru is a dormant stratovolcano located in Arusha National Park, 70 Kilometres (43 miles) west of Mount Kilimanjaro in the country of Tanzania. Typically Mount Meru Climb takes four days, but it can be done in 3 days to complete a trek to the Summit.

It is visible from Mount Kilimanjaro on a clear day, and is the fifth-highest mountain in Africa, dependent on definition. Climb Mount Meru, Second highest Mountain in Tanzania, is great with no traffic and amazing wildlife experience as you hike past wild animals.

mount Meru route Map
Mount Meru Route Map

Mount Meru Key facts

1. Tanzania’s second tallest mountain at 4,566m
2. Abundant wildlife sightings on day 1 of the climb
3. Great acclimatisation climb before tackling Kilimanjaro
4. Ascent and descent via the Momela route over 3 days
5. Dormitory style hut accommodation

 

Climbing Mount Meru Itinerary
Mount Meru Cost
Mount Meru Climbing Safety
Items included  and not in Mount Meru Climb
 

While Mount Kilimanjaro the highest mountain in Africa gets the bulk of the attention when it comes to climbing in Tanzania, there are other peaks that are worth considering too. Most prominent amongst them is Mount Meru, which is found a short distance to the west of Kilimanjaro and serves as a great warm-up trek for those who have the time and are looking for an even bigger adventure. Mount Meru climbing is very rewarding.

Mount Meru summit 4566M
The Mount Meru summit at 4566M

Standing 4565 meters (14,980 feet) in height, Mt. Meru is a more approachable climb than Kilimanjaro and serves as a great stand alone hike in its own right. Many trekkers choose to use Mount Meru as an acclimation hike prior to starting their trek up Africa’s highest peak. Doing so increases their chances of a successful summit on Kilimanjaro and can reduce the number of days needed to climb to the summit at Uhuru Peak. 

Visitors to Mount Meru are more likely to spot wildlife along the trail, particularly in the early days of the hike. Often times a ranger will accompany trekking groups on the first day of the journey to ensure they make it safely to the first campsite.

From there, the route wanders up the north side of Meru’s volcanic crater, before approaching the true summit itself. At the top, the views are outstanding, particularly with Kilimanjaro gleaming tantalizingly in the distance.

Typically Mount Meru Climb takes four days, but it can be done in 3 days to complete a trek to the top as even on this lower peak, acclimatization is the key to success. All trekking groups take the same route up the mountain, which begins at Momella Gate.

Hikers will stay in a series of huts on their way to the top, with basic but comfortable accommodations located at two different campsites prior to the going to the summit, which is located at a place called Socialist Peak.

Mount Meru Climbing offers two advantages to travelers. First, it allows trekkers a chance to experience what it is like to climb Kilimanjaro on a smaller scale, providing a grand adventure for those who don’t have a lot of time in their schedule or don’t want to deal with the higher altitude found on Kilimanjaro.

But perhaps more importantly, it truly is a wonderful way to prepare for the larger challenges that they’ll face on Kilimanjaro, taking some of the mystery and acclimatization process out of the picture before ever stepping foot on the mountain. 

Climbing Kilimanjaro offers Mount Meru 3 day or 4 day Climbs. However, clients from different parties and operators are often combined to walk with the armed ranger on the lower slopes.


Climb Mount Meru Itinerary
Below we have shared a 4 day / 3 nights Meru climb but you can do it in 3 days / 2 nights which we do not recommend due to long walking distance from Miriakamba Hut to the Socialist Peak  and back all the way to Momella Gate.

DAY 1 : MOMELLA GATE (1500 M) –MIRIAKAMBA HUT (2541 M)
WALKING TIME: 4-6 HOURS

views of Kilimanjaro from Mount Meru
views of Kilimanjaro from Mount Meru

Leaving early in the morning from your accommodation in Arusha or Moshi and driving to Momella gate in Arusha National Park. Driving takes about 3 hours from Moshi and about 1 hr from Arusha. At the gate you will clear your trekking permits, meet up with your porters, guide, cook and game ranger, and start climbing. You will pass open grassland which will give you a good opportunity to see buffaloes, warthogs and other grazers.

You will cross the Ngare Nanyuki River and continue climbing through mountain forest. There you will have chance to see many different kind of birds and black and white colobus monkeys. Finally you will reach Miriakamba Hut where you will stay overnight.

DAY 2: MIRIAKAMBA HUT (2541 M) – SADDLE HUT (3570 M)
WALKING TIME: 3-5 HOURS

Second day climbing is quite short but demanding. You will start early in the morning and ascent steeply through lush mountain forest full of birds to reach the halfway point of Elephant Ridge. There you can see the crater. After 3 to 5 hours climbing you will reach Saddle Hut where you will have lunch.

In the afternoon you will have another hiking to Little Meru (3794 m) for superb views before sunset. Then you will return to Saddle Hut for overnight. It is good to go to sleep early so that you get enough rest for the next day’s hiking.

DAY 3 : SADDLE HUT (3570 M) – RHINO POINT (3850 M) – PEAK ( 4566 M) – RHINO POINT (3850 M) – SADDLE HUT (3570 M) – MIRIAKAMBA HUT (2541 M)
WALKING TIME: 10-12 HOURS

You will start climbing between 1 to 2 at night. The route is very steep towards Rhino Point (3850 m) and from there towards the summit along very narrow ridge. You will reach the mount meru summit, Socialist Peak, (4566 m) right at the sunrise.

The sceneries there are stunning; you will see Mount Kilimanjaro in close distance. After taking photos on the summit you will descent back to Saddle hut.
Note: On icy conditions or strong wind it is not necessarily possible to pass the ridge between Rhino Point and summit. You guide will decide if the conditions are not good enough to continue.

​
DAY 4 : MIRIAKAMBA HUT (2541 M) – MOMELLA GATE (1500 M)
WALKING TIME: 2-5 HOURS
You will leave about at 8.00 in the morning and descent to Momella gate. You can choose longer or shorter route down. On the longer way down you have very good changes to see wildlife and the ash cone. Once at the gate, it’s time to tip your porters, guide, cook and game ranger. After that your transportation back to Moshi will be waiting for you.


3 Day Mount Meru Climb quick over view
Day 1: Arusha – Momella gate – Mariakamba HutDrive 1 Hr, Hike Distance 10 km, 4 – 5 hrs, 1000m ascent, Altitude: 2516m

Drive to the Arusha National Park gate at Momella. For the first section of the climb through the lush forest, crossing the Ngare Nanyuki river to reach Miriakamba Hut at 8337ft/2541m for overnight stay. Dinner and overnight Mariakamba Hut.

Day 2: Mariakamba Hut to Saddle Hut
Hike Distance 4km, 2 – 3 hrs, 1050m ascent, Altitude: 3566m

Continue to ascend steeply through the pleasant forest glades and giant heather to reach Saddle Hut at 11,713ft/3570m.
From here it is possible to take a side trek to reach the summit of Little Meru 12,450ft/3794m and return to Saddle Hut in about 2 hours. Dinner and overnight Saddle Hut.



Day 3: Saddle Hut to Meru Summit to Momella Gate
Hike distance 5km ascent + 19km descent, 4 – 5 hrs ascent + 6-8 hours descent, 1000m ascent, Altitude: 4566m

An early start to reach Rhino Point and then on to the summit at 14,981ft/4566m to see the sunrise behind Mount Kilimanjaro, before descending back to Momella Gate to be met and transferred back to your hotel.
Drive 1 hr back to Arusha.

 

Mount Meru Cost
The price for a 3 day Meru climb is USD 950 Per Person and the price for a 4 day Meru climb is USD 1050 per person. You can climb Mount Meru all year round and you can pick and choose your own travel dates but we recommend you avoid the rainy season. The best time to climb Mount Meru is January to early March and June to October.


Mount Meru Climbing Safety
 Be open and honest with us at all time. We’re part of the same team and share the same goal – to reach the top and come back comfortably and safely.
Mount Meru waterfalls
Mount Meru waterfalls

Never pretend to feel well if you don’t before or during climb.
Make sure you are in good physical and mental health before attempting the mountain. We recommend a medical check prior to any climb.
Most people will experience mild symptoms of altitude sickness. Your guide is experienced in identifying and dealing with altitude sickness but you should also educate yourself about the symptoms and prevention of Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS), High Altitude Sickness (HAS), High Altitude Pulmonary Edema (HAPE) and High Altitude Cerebral Edema (HACE).
Should you experience any symptoms of AMS, immediate descent is the remedy on Mt. Meru and will be ordered by your guide.
Before Climbing Mount Meru
Start your physical preparation (hiking) at least two months before. Decrease efforts the last 2 weeks and rest the final days before the climb so your body can recover properly. We recommend long walks in different terrain, swimming and yoga.
Start practicing deep, deliberate breathing. Try Pranayama breathing technique or any other that suits your lungs.
Make sure you are properly equipped according to our packing gear list.
You should bring some “comfort” food, such as chocolate and energy bars or energy drinks powder. You might need this for a boost on summit night.
During  Mount Meru Climb
Be positive and prepared for any kind of weather and surface – rainy, foggy, snowy, dusty, muddy, loose surface.
Ascend slowly. Don’t overexert yourself.
Take deep, deliberate breaths.
Communicate openly with your guide and follow his instructions at all times. He is the most experienced  person on the mountain and there to assist you at all times.
At high altitudes, loss of appetite is common. Eat and drink properly even if you don’t feel like it.
Mount Meru summit day/night is tough. Steep ascent and sheer drops at some places, cold, wind and loose gravel surface will require your best efforts. Prepare yourself for this challenge and conserve mental and physical energy from the start. You will need it!
Don’t forget to enjoy! Feel connected to the mountain and feel the spiritual experience offered to you.