A Challenging Summit Climb High on Adventure

If you are looking for a power-packed and thrilling summit climb, the Pangarchulla Peak trek offers just that. The summit point of the Pangarchulla Peak trek is situated at a challenging altitude of 15,069 ft.

To begin with, Pangarchulla is a 5-day trek (7 days when you include the travel days from Rishikesh). The trek starts from Auli near Joshimath in the Garhwal region of Uttarakhand. It is situated in the Nanda Devi National Park. 

This trek is known for its summit climb. For anyone who has done this trek, that will be the first thing to recall about their trek. The summit day is for one very long. You climb over lots of boulders covered over snow, feeling your feet every step of the way.

While the summit climb in itself leaves you with a strong adrenaline rush, what adds to this experience is the mountain views you get from the top. All along the trek, you are accompanied by grand views of a big part of the Greater Himalayan Range. And at the summit, you are surrounded by them and they all stand so close to you.

And when you trek in March and April, they are filled with blooming Rhododendrons, providing colours to the already beautiful forest. Being in Khullara will transport you to a different world altogether.

Trek Fee

₹

12,450

Optional Additions

+ 5% GST

+ Rs 210 Trek Insurance
Inclusions and Exclusions
Cancellation policy

Available Dates

февраль 2024 г.

март 2024 г.

Pangarchulla Peak - Complete Trek Information
We have always wanted trekkers to be well-informed before they go on a Himalayan trek. Knowledge is the difference between a safe trek and a dangerous one. It’s also the difference between a wholesome experience and a superficial experience.

Use this section to learn about the Pangarchulla Peak trek. It has in-depth information about each day of the trek, what to expect, and how you need to prepare for it. Many years of expertise have gone into this content. Trekkers find that extremely useful.



Quick Itinerary

Get your trek plan



How Does Each Day Look

Complete day-wise guide with pictures



How Difficult is the Pangarchulla Peak Trek?

This will tell you just how fit you must be



Best Time to do the Pangarchulla Peak Trek

Time your trek well



How to Reach the Base Camp

Plan your travel



What to Pack for Your Trek

Things you must take on the trek



Frequently Asked Questions

Get your questions answered here



Why get fit for the Pangarchulla Trek

Fitness matters for the trek

Pangarchulla Peak Videos