Attractions During Mt Black Peak Expedition
Kalanag or Black Peak (6,387 m) is the highest peak in the Saraswati (Bandarpunch) mountain range, others being Saraswati Devi Parvat (Bandarpunch I, 6,316 m) and Hanuman Parvat (White Peak or Bandarpunch II, 6,102 m). It literally means "Black Cobra". It is close to the Ruinsara Valley.


Overview Of Mt Black Peak Expedition
The Black Peak is also known as the Kalanaag or Kalanag peak. It stands at an elevation of 6387 meters in the Govind Wildlife Sanctuary and National Park in the Uttarkashi district of Uttarakhand. It is one amongst the prominent range overpowering the Banderpuch by its charm. The trek to Black Peak Base Camp begins from Sankri. The ride to Sankri from Dehradun is a spectacular one, as it has the most majestic grandeur of this route.

Key Points of Black Peak Expedition
● Level: – Technical, Difficult, or Challenging
● During the trek, proper conditioning & training of body is required.
● In addition, need of proper gear & clothing for sub-zero temperature
● Furthermore, shoes are the single most important equipment.
● High Altitude requires proper acclimatization.
● Beautiful landscapes so carry good photo gear & Extra battery backup.
● In addition, the backpack should not exceed 15 kg.
● Alcohol and smoking is not allowed in during the Expedition
● need to proper knowledge of technical claiming equipment

Black Peak (Kalanag) expedition is made only for experienced trekkers who want to test their limits. The challenges faced in the trek should not be underestimated. You should attempt this trek only if you have already done a trek that climbs to 5000 meters and above. It is recommended not to opt this trek if you cannot get acclimatized in the mountains. Besides you need to have a strong physical endurance to complete this expedition.

For the magnificent location in which it is housed, Black Peak has some of the most reverential mountains in its vicinity. All the major peaks of the Garhwal range like Swargarohini, Bhagirathi Massif, Bandarpunch, Gangotri range of mountains and many more keep you company along the trail. The trail itself, for passing through Govind National Park which is known for its diverse flora and fauna, boasts of insurmountable beauty across an assortment of landscapes ranging from alpine meadows to pine forests to moraine ridges, boulders and glacial basins.

Black Peak offers the right mix of beauty and challenge. A technical expedition overall, the most demanding section of the climb is the 75 feet vertical ice wall with a 70 degree gradient which comes on your way to the summit. Walking across crevassed snowfields, navigating glaciers, miles of rocky moraines and the continuously thinning air of the altitude, Black Peak is an overall challenging endeavor which requires knowledge of mountaineering equipment and skills specific to surviving at this altitude. Hence, it is an expedition reserved for experienced climbers only. Mountaineering certification or alternatively vast experience in high-altitude trekking and extreme temperature is a mandate to undertake this challenging expedition.


Food Provided During Mt Black Peak Expedition
Standard Veg
Standard Eggetarian

Transport Provided during Mt Black Peak Expedition
Standard Land Transport
SUV
Off Roading Vehicle
Mini Bus

Safety & Precautions for Mt Black Peak Expedition
1. Experienced and Certified Sherpa, HAP, Expedition Leader, Trek Leader, first aid respondent and Guide
2. Recue - Extra charge depending upon situation
3. First Aid Kit
4. Oxygen
5. Stretcher
6. Oximeter Device
Why Choose Mt Black Peak Expedition
8 years Experienced and Certified Expedition Leader, Trek Leader, first aid respondent and Guide. We are the son of the soil. We were born in these mountains and grew up playing in these valleys. We know this area and the best practices here, as the back of our palm. We have multiple times summited Black Peak. We are always calm, polite, well mannered, well spoken and Technically Experienced.
Extra
Adventure Tour
Land Based
High Altitude Mountains
Low Altitude Mountains
Glaciers
Cloud Forest
Coniferous Forest
Standard
Standard Veg
Standard Eggetarian
Pub / High Altitude Tents
Home stay
Guest House
Standard Land Transport
SUV
Off Roading Vehicle
Mini Bus
SHARED AMONG: 2
mountaineering
6387 Meter
120 Kilo Meters